compensating control and decouple authNs for PACS and local access from 63.md (#642)
usnistgov/FIPS201: _FIPS201/authentication.md

The authentication mechanisms in this section describe how to authenticate using the PIV Card directly. The 
authenticated identity can also be used to create an identity assertion as part of a federation
protocol, as described in [Section 7](federation.md#s-7) and further specified in [[SP 800-217]](../_Appendix/references.md#ref-SP-800-217).

## 6.1 PIV Assurance Levels {#s-6-1}

This Standard defines multiple levels of assurance for logical and physical access. Each assurance level establishes a degree of confidence that the presenter of

> the PIV Card is the person referred to by the PIV credential. The entity performing the authentication further establishes confidence that the person referred to by the PIV credential is a specific person identified through the rigor of the identity proofing process conducted prior to issuance of the PIV Card and the security of the PIV Card issuance and maintenance processes specified in [Section 2](requirements.md#s-2). The PIV identity proofing, registration, issuance, and maintenance processes meet or exceed [^compensating] the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the PIV Card is the person referred to by the PIV credential. The entity performing the authentication further establishes confidence that the person referred to by the PIV credential is a specific person identified through the rigor of the identity proofing process conducted prior to issuance of the PIV Card and the security of the PIV Card issuance and maintenance processes specified in [Section 2](requirements.md#s-2). The PIV identity proofing, registration, issuance, and maintenance processes meet[^compensating] the
```

cardholder. Once the required assurance level has been determined, one of the authentication mechanisms
specified in [Section 6.2](authentication.md#s-6-2) **SHALL** be applied to achieve that assurance level.

> [^compensating]: As described in [Section 2.7](requirements.md#s-2-7), compensating controls can be applied for identity source documents evidence to achieve IAL3 since the Standard only specifies one piece of Strong evidence and one other piece of Fair evidence. Issuance of PIV Card meets IAL3 since the federal background investigation serves as a camparable compensating control for IAL3 identity proofing. 

Author: ```suggestion
[^compensating]: As described in [Section 2.7](requirements.md#s-2-7), compensating controls can be applied for identity source documents evidence to achieve IAL3 since the Standard only specifies one piece of Strong evidence and one other piece of Fair evidence. Issuance of PIV Card meets IAL3 since the federal background investigation serves as a comparable compensating control for IAL3 identity proofing. 
```

> [^compensating]: As described in [Section 2.7](requirements.md#s-2-7), compensating controls **MAY** be applied for identity source documents evidence at IAL3 as the Standard requires only one piece of Strong evidence and one other piece of FAIR evidence. The issuance of PIV Card meets and exceeds IAL3; however,  since the federal background investigation serves as a strong compensating control for IAL3 ID proofing. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[^compensating]: As described in [Section 2.7](requirements.md#s-2-7), compensating controls can be applied for identity source documents evidence at IAL3 as the Standard requires only one piece of Strong evidence and one other piece of FAIR evidence. The issuance of PIV Card meets IAL3 since the federal background investigation serves as a strong compensating control for IAL3 ID proofing.
```

Reviewer 3: Suggest also being consistent with capitalization of Strong and FAIR.

## 6.3 PIV Support of Graduated Authenticator Assurance Levels {#s-6-3}

The PIV Card supports a set of authentication mechanisms that can be used to implement graduated
assurance levels. The assurance levels used for remote/networked access within this Standard are closely aligned with
NIST [[SP 800-63]](../_Appendix/references.md#ref-SP-800-63), which specifies a digital identity risk management process that is cited by OMB [[M-19-17]](../_Appendix/references.md#ref-OMB1917).

The following subsections specify which PIV

> authentication mechanisms can be used to support the various identity assurance levels

Reviewer 3: But this should be authenticator assurance levels, right?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
authentication mechanisms can be used to support the various authenticator assurance levels
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
authentication mechanisms can be used to support the various assurance levels
```

described in this section. Two or more authentication mechanisms **MAY** be applied in
unison to achieve additional assurance of the identity of the PIV cardholder. For example, PKI-AUTH and BIO may be applied in unison to achieve additional assurance of cardholder identity.

Adequately designed and implemented relying systems can achieve the PIV Card

> assurance levels stated in [Section 6.3.1](authentication.md#s-6-3-1) for physical access and in  [Section 6.3.2](authentication.md#s-6-3-2) for logical access. Relying systems that are inadequately designed

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
assurance levels stated in [Section 6.3.1](authentication.md#s-6-3-1) for physical access and in [Section 6.3.2](authentication.md#s-6-3-2) for logical access. Relying systems that are inadequately designed
```

### 6.3.1 Physical Access {#s-6-3-1}

> The PIV Card can be used to authenticate the cardholder in a physical access control environment using the authentication mechanisms described [Section 6.2](authentication.md#s-6-2). Each authentication mechanism provides a degree of authentication assurance based on its characteristics outlined in [Section 6.2](authentication.md#s-6-2), as summarized in [Table 6-1](authentication.md#table-6-1).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The PIV Card can be used to authenticate the cardholder in a physical access control environment using the authentication mechanisms described in [Section 6.2](authentication.md#s-6-2). Each authentication mechanism provides a degree of physical security assurance based on its characteristics outlined in [Section 6.2](authentication.md#s-6-2), as summarized in [Table 6-1](authentication.md#table-6-1).
```

> The PIV Card can be used to authenticate the cardholder in a physical access control environment using the authentication mechanisms described in [Section 6.2](authentication.md#s-6-2). Each authentication mechanism provides a degree of physical security assurance based on its characteristics outlined in [Section 6.2](authentication.md#s-6-2), as summarized in [Table 6-1](authentication.md#table-6-1).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The PIV Card can be used to authenticate the cardholder in a physical access control environment using the authentication mechanisms described in [Section 6.2](authentication.md#s-6-2). Each authentication mechanism provides a degree of assurance based on its characteristics outlined in [Section 6.2](authentication.md#s-6-2), as summarized in [Table 6-1](authentication.md#table-6-1).
```

[Table 6-1. PIV Authentication Mechanisms for Physical Access](authentication.md#table-6-1){:name="table-6-1"}
{:latex-ignore="true"}

|PIV Authentication Mechanism|Assurance Provided|
|---|---|
|PKI-CAK|Some confidence in the asserted identity|
|SYM-CAK|Some confidence in the asserted identity|
|SM-AUTH|Some confidence in the asserted identity|
|BIO|Medium confidence in the asserted identity|
|BIO-A|High confidence in the asserted identity|
|OCC-AUTH|High confidence in the asserted identity|
|PKI-AUTH|High confidence in the asserted identity|

{:latex-table="6-1" latex-caption="PIV Authentication Mechanisms for Physical Access"}

> Each PIV authentication mechanism provides one or two factors of authentication. The mechanisms can be combined[^combined] to achieve up to three factors of authentication (e.g., to access exclusion security area). The number of factors afforded by each authentication mechanism and the required factors to access the controlled, limited or exclusion security areas are furter detailed in [[SP 800-116]](../references/#ref-SP-800-116).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Each PIV authentication mechanism provides one or two factors of authentication. The mechanisms can be combined[^combined] to achieve up to three authentication factors (e.g., to access exclusion security areas). The number of factors afforded by each authentication mechanism and the required factors to access the controlled, limited, or exclusion security areas are further detailed in [[SP 800-116]](../references/#ref-SP-800-116).
```

The PIV Card can be used to authenticate the cardholder in a physical access control
environment.

The three levels of authentication assurance for physical access are defined as:

SOME confidence in the asserted identity's validity (weakest).

HIGH confidence in the asserted identity's validity.

VERY HIGH confidence in the asserted identity's validity (strongest).

The selection of authentication assurance levels **SHALL** be made in accordance with the applicable policies for a facility’s security level [[RISK-MGMT-FACILITIES]](../_Appendix/references.md#ref-RISK-MGMT-FACILITIES). Additional guidelines for the selection and use of PIV authentication mechanisms for facility access can be found in NIST [[SP 800-116]](../_Appendix/references.md#ref-SP-800-116).

The PIV-supported authentication mechanisms

> for physical access control systems are summarized in [Table 6-1](authentication.md#table-6-1).  These mechanism represent one or two factors of authentication, depending on the authenciation mechanim. The mechanisms **CAN** be  [^combined] to achieve 3 factor authentication (e.g., to access exclusion security area). The number of factors afforded by each authentication mechanisms and the requried factors to access controlled, limited or exclusion security access area are detailed in  [[SP 800-116]](../references/#ref-SP-800-116).

Author: ```suggestion
for physical access control systems are summarized in [Table 6-1](authentication.md#table-6-1). These mechanism represent one or two factors of authentication, depending on the authentication mechanism. The mechanisms **CAN** be  [^combined] to achieve 3 factor authentication (e.g., to access exclusion security area). The number of factors afforded by each authentication mechanism and the required factors to access controlled, limited or exclusion security access areas are detailed in  [[SP 800-116]](../references/#ref-SP-800-116).
```

> for physical access control systems are summarized in [Table 6-1](authentication.md#table-6-1). These mechanism represent one or two factors of authentication, depending on the authentication mechanism. The mechanisms **CAN** be  [^combined] to achieve 3 factor authentication (e.g., to access exclusion security area). The number of factors afforded by each authentication mechanism and the required factors to access controlled, limited or exclusion security access areas are detailed in  [[SP 800-116]](../references/#ref-SP-800-116).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
for physical access control systems are summarized in [Table 6-1](authentication.md#table-6-1). These mechanism represent one or two factors of authentication, depending on the authentication mechanism. The mechanisms can be combined[^combined] to achieve 3-factor authentication (e.g., to access exclusion security area). The number of factors afforded by each authentication mechanism and the required factors to access controlled, limited or exclusion security access areas are detailed in  [[SP 800-116]](../references/#ref-SP-800-116).
```

[^combined]: Combinations of authentication mechanisms are specified in [[SP 800-116]](../references/#ref-SP-800-116).

[Table 6-1. Applicable PIV Authentication Mechanisms for Physical Access](authentication.md#table-6-1){:name="table-6-1"}
{:latex-ignore="true"}

|Physical Assurance Level|Applicable PIV Authentication Mechanisms|
|---|---|

> |SOME|PKI-CAK, SM-AUTH, SYM-CAK (deprecated)|
> |HIGH|BIO|
> |VERY HIGH|BIO-A, OCC-AUTH, PKI-AUTH|

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|PKI-CAK|Some confidence|
|SM-AUTH|Some confidence|
|SYM-CAK (deprecated)|Some confidence|
|BIO|High confidence|
|BIO-A|Very high confidence|
|OCC-AUTH|Very high confidence|
|PKI-AUTH|Very high confidence|
```

network using the PIV Card; the identity established through this authentication process can be used to
determine access to information systems and applications available on the network.

[Table 6-2](authentication.md#table-6-2 lists the authentication mechanisms defined for this Standard to support logical access
control for remote/networked access. An authentication mechanism that is suitable for a higher assurance level can also be applied to
meet the requirements for a lower assurance level.

[Table 6-2. PIV Authentication Mechanisms for Remote/Network Access](authentication.md#table-6-1){:name="table-6-2"}
{:latex-ignore="true"}

|PIV Authentication Mechanism|Supported Authenticator Assurance Level|
|---|---|
|PKI-CAK|AAL1|

> |PKI-AUTH|AA3|

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|PKI-AUTH|AAL3|
```

{:latex-table="6-1" latex-caption="PIV Authentication Mechanisms for Remote/Network Access"}

> The [[SP 800-63]](../_Appendix/references.md#ref-SP-800-63) defined authenticator assurance levels are not specified for local authentication use cases (e.g.; authentication to a resource co-located with the cardholder). Nevertheless, the PIV authentication mechanisms provide for gradulated levels of authentication assurance for local authentication use cases based on its characteristics outlined in [Section 6.2](authentication.md#s-6-2). The assurance provided by each of the PIV authentication mechanisms for local authentication use cases is summarized in [Table 6-3](authentication.md#table-6-3).

Author: ```suggestion
The [[SP 800-63]](../_Appendix/references.md#ref-SP-800-63) defined authenticator assurance levels are not specified for local authentication use cases (e.g.; authentication to a resource co-located with the cardholder). Nevertheless, the PIV authentication mechanisms provide for graduated levels of authentication assurance for local authentication use cases based on their characteristics outlined in [Section 6.2](authentication.md#s-6-2). The assurance provided by each of the PIV authentication mechanisms for local authentication use cases is summarized in [Table 6-3](authentication.md#table-6-3).
```

> The [[SP 800-63]](../_Appendix/references.md#ref-SP-800-63) defined authenticator assurance levels are not specified for local authentication use cases (e.g.; authentication to a resource co-located with the cardholder). Nevertheless, the PIV authentication mechanisms provide for gradulated levels of authentication assurance for local authentication use cases based on its characteristics outlined in [Section 6.2](authentication.md#s-6-2). The assurance provided by each of the PIV authentication mechanisms for local authentication use cases is summarized in [Table 6-3](authentication.md#table-6-3).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The [[SP 800-63]](../_Appendix/references.md#ref-SP-800-63) defined authenticator assurance levels are not specified for local authentication use cases (authentication to a resource co-located with the cardholder). Nevertheless, the PIV authentication mechanisms provide for graduated levels of authentication assurance for local authentication use cases based on its characteristics outlined in [Section 6.2](authentication.md#s-6-2). The assurance provided by each of the PIV authentication mechanisms for local authentication use cases is summarized in [Table 6-3](authentication.md#table-6-3).
```

> The [[SP 800-63]](../_Appendix/references.md#ref-SP-800-63) defined authenticator assurance levels are not specified for local authentication use cases (e.g.; authentication to a resource co-located with the cardholder). Nevertheless, the PIV authentication mechanisms provide for graduated levels of authentication assurance for local authentication use cases based on their characteristics outlined in [Section 6.2](authentication.md#s-6-2). The assurance provided by each of the PIV authentication mechanisms for local authentication use cases is summarized in [Table 6-3](authentication.md#table-6-3).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [[SP 800-63]](../_Appendix/references.md#ref-SP-800-63) defined authenticator assurance levels are not specified for local authentication use cases (e.g., authentication to a resource co-located with the cardholder). Nevertheless, the PIV authentication mechanisms provide for graduated levels of authentication assurance for local authentication use cases based on their characteristics outlined in [Section 6.2](authentication.md#s-6-2). The assurance provided by each of the PIV authentication mechanisms for local authentication use cases is summarized in [Table 6-3](authentication.md#table-6-3).
```

Selection of required AAL **SHALL** be made using the risk management process specified in [[SP 800-63]](../_Appendix/references.md#ref-SP-800-63).

[Table 6-2](authentication.md#table-6-2) describes the authentication mechanisms defined for this Standard to support logical access
control for remote/networked access. An authentication mechanism that is suitable for a higher assurance level can also be applied to
meet the requirements for a lower assurance level.

[Table 6-2. Applicable PIV Authentication Mechanisms for Remote/Network Access](authentication.md#table-6-2){:name="table-6-2"}
{:latex-ignore="true"}

|Required Authenticator Assurance Level|Remote/Network Authentication|
|---|---|---|

> |AAL1|PKI-CAK|
> |AAL2| |
> |AAL3|PKI-AUTH|

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|PKI-CAK|AAL1|
|PKI-AUTH|AAL3|
```
